# REFLECTIVE REPORT FOR NOSQL IMPLEMENTATION

In this report I discuss the design, implementation and querying of of NoSQL database for data storage, retrieval and  analysis.
The NoSQL database used in this project  is QuestDB.QuestDB is a popular NoSQL database that uses column-family storage and supports SQL-like query language.
The reason why I chose the database is because it is Apache Licensed [1], meaning it is open source and free to use. Another reason is that "QuestDB implements ANSI SQL with native time-series SQL extensions. These SQL extensions make it simple to analyze, filter and down sample data, or to correlate data from multiple sources using relational and time-series joins" [2]. The database is well known for its horizontal scaling and high performance when dealing with large volumes of data.
It is designed for optimization and handling of timestamped data. The process of modeling the data for a particular monitoring station, importing and querying the data,
 and the difficulties faced during implementation are all discussed in this study. It also assesses the abilities acquired and possible enhancements for upcoming 
 database initiatives.

To set things off, I first started with denormalizing my tables into one general table using python and one of it's many libraries, `pandas`. This was done because we are dealing with a `NoSQL` database which does not support the concept of normalization and relation tables. Although QuestDB can accept relational tables, I didn't choose that format since it won't have met the requirement of the assessment. Fast forward after denormalizing my data, I preprocessed it into timestamped data. To achieve this I had to set the `Date time` column as the index and then sorted the data in an ascending order. All this preprocessing was done to meet the database requirements on how data should look like before populating it.
Using python again and its libraries , I populated the database with the preprocessed data. Queries were then executed to analyze air quality metrics, such as the highest `NO` level recorded or air pollutant levels at a certain hour of the day.

Initially I had imposter syndrome about working with NoSQL database since I have only worked with `MongoDB`(NoSQL DB) and relational databases before. However, after going through the documentation and tutorials, I was able to manoeuvre my way through the design and implementation. I was able to successfully implement the database and execute queries to analyze the data from the monitoring station. The SQL-like queries made it even better for me since I am familiar with SQL. This boosted my morale and confidence to do data retrieval and analysis using the timeseries NoSQL database.

The incorporation of Python programming language in data cleaning, cropping and population of the database was a major success in my assessment, as it allowed me to process the large data efficiently and quickly.This saved a lot of time for me and horned my skills in programming as I was able to learn about new libraries that Python has and are used for interacting with databases. The use of QuestDB was also a success as it allowed me to store and query the data efficiently. While at it, I encountered several errors such as python compilation errors, database connection errors, data type errors, database population errors, spelling errors and many more. 
Some of these errors mainly occurred due to the fact that I lacked some libraries in python necessary for the task. I was able to overcome these errors by installing the necessary libraries and also by reading the documentation of the libraries and the database. In terms of populating the database, I encountered some errors due to the fact that the data was not in the correct format. To solve this I had to reformat the data to meet the database requirements, this involved setting the `Date time` column as the index and then sorting the data in an ascending order. This was easily done using python with just a few lines of code.

I learnt a lot from this project, especially about the design and implementation of NoSQL timeseries database. I learnt how data for timeseries database should be preprocessed in order to avoid running into errors. I also gained experience in using SQL-like queries to analyze data from the database. Knowing how QuestDB scales horizontally and its high performance when dealing with large volumes of data was a plus for me when undertaking this assignment. I also gained experience in using Python programming language and it's libraries to interact with the database and perform data preprocessing. Having encountered some errors in my code, I was able to learn how to debug errors and resolve them in my code. This project also helped me to improve my skills in programming, especially functional programming, whereby you write algorithms in form of a function to help you carry out certain tasks. I learnt the process of using my machine to create a server and using network ports to interact with the database user interface on a web browser. Least but not last, I learnt the importance of commenting code, in both python and SQL, to make it easier for others to understand what the code is doing.

To sum it up all,this project a success and I was able to implement a NoSQL timeseries database using Quest database. Being my first time, I am proud I was able to achieve a lot in a short span of time. The project has prepared on how to design, implement and preprocess data for a NoSQL timeseries database. I was able to learn how to use SQL-like queries to analyze data from the database. I also gained experience in using Python programming language and its libraries to interact with the database and perform data preprocessing.
### References
* [1] QuestDB Licensing. Available online here; https://github.com/questdb/questdb/blob/master/LICENSE.txt
* [2] QuestDB ANSI SQL extensions. Available online here; https://github.com/questdb/questdb/blob/master/README.md
* [3] QuestDB Documentation. Available online here; https://questdb.com/docs/





